---
layout: page
title: Finitely Generated Abelian Groups
usemathjax: true
tag: Abstract Algebra, Group Theory
time: 2022/10/15
---

**Table of Content**
- [Direct Product](#direct-product)
  - [Theorem (cyclic abelian groups)](#theorem-cyclic-abelian-groups)
  - [Theorem (order of an element)](#theorem-order-of-an-element)
  - [Note](#note)
- [Finitely Generated Abelian Groups](#finitely-generated-abelian-groups)
  - [Definition (finitely generated abelian groups)](#definition-finitely-generated-abelian-groups)
  - [Theorem  (Fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups)](#theorem--fundamental-theorem-of-finitely-generated-abelian-groups)
  - [Theorem (subgroup of order $$m$$)](#theorem-subgroup-of-order-m)
  - [$$p$$-torsion Subgroup](#p-torsion-subgroup)
    - [Determine group structure](#determine-group-structure)
    - [Theorem (cardinality of $$\\mathbb{Z}\_m^{\\times}$$)](#theorem-cardinality-of-mathbbz_mtimes)

---

## Direct Product

Let $$G_1,\cdots,G_n$$ be groups. For $$(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$$ and $$(b_1,\cdots,b_n)$$ in $$\prod_{i=1}^nG_i$$, define $$(a_1,\cdots,a_n)(b_1,\cdots,b_n) = (a_1b_1,\cdots,a_nb_n)$$.

> 定義 element-wise operation。

> The group $$\prod_{i=1}^nG_i = G_1 \times \cdots \times G_n$$ is called the **direct product** of the groups $$G_i$$.

### Theorem (cyclic abelian groups)
> The group $$\mathbb{Z}_m \times \mathbb{Z}_n$$ is **cyclic and isomorphic** to $$\mathbb{Z}_{mn}$$ *if and only if* $$m$$ and $$n$$ are **relatively prime**.

**Proof**

($$\Rightarrow$$)

Suppose $$\mathbb{Z}_m \times \mathbb{Z}_n$$ is cyclic and has a generator $$(\bar a, \bar b)$$, which is of order $$mn$$. Let $$k = \text{lcm}(m,n)$$. Then

$$
k(\bar a, \bar b) = (\overline{ka}, \overline{kb}) = (\bar 0, \bar 0).
$$

> $$Z_m$$ 的 generator is of order $$m$$。

Therefore $$mn \le k = \text{lcm}(m,n)$$, which means that $$m$$ and $$n$$ are relatively prime.

($$\Leftarrow$$)

Conversly, assume that $$m$$ and $$n$$ are relatively prime, which means $$\text{lcm}(m,n)=mn$$. Let the order of the element $$(\bar 1, \bar 1)$$ to be $$k$$. Then $$k \le mn$$ and

$$
(\bar 0,\bar 0) = k(\bar 1, \bar 1) = (\bar k, \bar k).
$$

Therefore, $$m \vert k$$ and $$n \vert k$$, which means $$\text{lcm}(m,n) \vert k$$. In particular, we have

$$
mn = \text{lcm}(m,n) \le k \le mn.
$$

We conclude that $$k = mn$$, $$(\bar 1, \bar 1)$$ is a generator, and $$\mathbb{Z}_m \times \mathbb{Z}_n$$ is cyclic. ◼

### Theorem (order of an element)
> Let $$(a_1,\cdots,a_n) \in \prod^n_{i=1}G_i$$. If $$a_i$$ is of finite order $$r_i$$ in $$G_i$$, then the order of $$(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$$ is equal to $$\text{lcm}(r_1,\cdots,r_n)$$.

### Note

用特定 element(s) 的 **order** 或 group 是否 **cyclic** 來判斷兩 groups 是否 **isomorphic**！

> 當然，如果 groups 的 order 不同，也不可能存在 isomorphism！

**e.g.**

max element order:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{Z}_8 &: 8 \\
\mathbb{Z}_{4}\times\mathbb{Z}_2 &: 4 \\
\mathbb{Z}_2\times\mathbb{Z}_2\times\mathbb{Z}_2 &: 2
\end{align*}
$$

所以以上三 groups 兩兩不 isomorphic。 

---

## Finitely Generated Abelian Groups
### Definition (finitely generated abelian groups)
> An abelian group is finitely generated if it can be **generated by a finite number of elements**.

### Theorem  (Fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups)
Suppose that $$G$$ is a finitely generated abelian group. Then $$G$$ is isomorphic to a *direct product* of cyclic groups in the form 

$$
\mathbb{Z}_{p_1^{e_1}}\times\mathbb{Z}_{p_2^{e_2}}\times\cdots\mathbb{Z}_{p_n^{e_n}}\times\mathbb{Z}\times\cdots\times\mathbb{Z},
$$

where $$p_i$$ are **primes**, not necessarily distinct. The direct product is *unique* except for possible rearrangement of the factors.

> 後方 $$\mathbb{Z}$$ 的數量稱為 the **free rank** of $$G$$。

**e.g.**

Using the above theorem, we find that the only abelian groups of order $$360=2^33^25$$, up to isomorphism, are

$$
\begin{align*}
&\mathbb{Z}_{2^3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3^2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{5}\ (\cong \mathbb{Z}_{360}), \\
&\mathbb{Z}_{2^2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3^2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{5}, \\
&\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3^2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{5}, \\
&\mathbb{Z}_{2^3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{5}, \\
&\mathbb{Z}_{2^2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{5}, \\
&\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{3}\times\mathbb{Z}_{5}.
\end{align*}
$$

In general, if the prime factorization of a positive integer $$n$$ is $$n=p_1^{e_1}\cdots p_k^{e_k}$$, where $$p_i$$ are distinct primes, then the number of all abelian groups of order $$n$$, up to isomorphism, is equal to 

$$
p(e_1)\cdots p(e_k),
$$

where $$p(e)$$ is the number of ways to **partition** the integer $$e$$.

> 上述例子共 $$3\cdot 2 \cdot 1 = 6$$ 個 abelian groups。

### Theorem (subgroup of order $$m$$)
> If $$m$$ divides the order of a finite abelian group $$G$$, then $$G$$ **has a subgroup** of order $$m$$.

**Proof**

By the above theorem, we have $$G=\mathbb{Z}_{p_1^{e_1}}\times\mathbb{Z}_{p_2^{e_2}}\times\cdots\mathbb{Z}_{p_n^{e_n}}$$.

If $$m \Big\vert \vert G \vert$$, then $$m = p_1^{f_1}\cdots p_n^{f_n}$$ for some non-negative integers $$f_i$$. (This representation may not be distinct.)

Then the subgroup

$$
\langle p_1^{e_1-f_1} \rangle \times \cdots \times \langle p_n^{e_n-f_n} \rangle
$$

has order $$p_1^{f_1}\cdots p_n^{f_n} = m$$. ◼

> $$\overline{p_1^{e_1-f_1}} \cdot p_1^{f_1} = \overline{p_1^{e_1}} = \bar 0$$, under $$\mathbb{Z}_{p_1^{e_1}}$$.

> 連加 $$p_1^{f_1}$$ 次就回到 identity！

> 對比 [Lagrange's Theorem](../F-Lagrange-thm/#lagranges-theorem)。

### $$p$$-torsion Subgroup

Follow from [the fundamental theorem](#theorem--fundamental-theorem-of-finitely-generated-abelian-groups), we can choose any $$p = p_i$$ to obtain a **cyclic subgroup** $$G_p$$, characterized by

$$
G_p = \{a\in G \vert a^{p^k} = e \text{ for some } k \in \mathbb{N} \},
$$

and $$G_p$$ is called the **$$p$$-torsion subgroup** of $$G$$.

We can rephrase the above result as

$$
G = \prod_{p\big\vert \vert G \vert} G_p,
$$

where $$G_p$$ is isomorphic to a group of the form

$$
\mathbb{Z}_{p^{r_1}}\times \cdots \mathbb{Z}_{p^{r_k}}.
$$

Therefore, to determine the **group structure of $$G$$**, it is sufficient to determine the **group structure of its p-torsion subgroups**.

#### Determine group structure

For a positive integer $$n$$, consider the following subsets

$$
G^{(n)} = \{a^n\vert a\in G \},
$$

which is a subgroup.

**Example**

For a group $$G$$ of order $$16$$, it can be isomorphic to one of the four groups:

$$
\mathbb{Z}_{16}, \mathbb{Z}_{8}\times \mathbb{Z}_{2}, \mathbb{Z}_{4}\times \mathbb{Z}_{4}, \mathbb{Z}_{4}\times (\mathbb{Z}_{2})^2, (\mathbb{Z}_{2})^4
$$

After computing these subsets of each posssible structure of $$G$$, we obtain

|    $$G$$    | $$\mathbb{Z}_{16}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{8}\times \mathbb{Z}_{2}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{4}\times \mathbb{Z}_{4}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{4}\times (\mathbb{Z}_{2})^2$$ | $$(\mathbb{Z}_{2})^4$$ |
| :---------: | :-----------------: | :-----------------: | :-----------------: | :-----------------: | :-----------------: |
| $$G^{(2)}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{8}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{4}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times \mathbb{Z}_{2}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{2}$$ | $$\{e\}$$ |
| $$G^{(4)}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{4}$$ | $$\mathbb{Z}_{2}$$ | $$\{e\}$$ | $$\{e\}$$ | $$\{e\}$$ |

which implies the following results:

- If $$G^{(2)}$$ contains $$8$$ elements, then $$G \cong \mathbb{Z}_{16}$$;
- If $$G^{(2)}$$ contains $$4$$ elements, and $$G^{(4)}$$ contains $$2$$ elements, then $$G \cong \mathbb{Z}_{8}\times\mathbb{Z}_{2}$$;
- $$\cdots$$.

> 以此類推，用以上表格就可以唯一決定 $$G$$ 的 structure！

*Note:* For a group $$T \cong \mathbb{Z}_{mn} $$, we have $$T^{(n)} \cong n\mathbb{Z}_{mn}\cong \mathbb{Z}_m $$. 也就是說，$$n\mathbb{Z}_n = \{e\}$$，消失了！

綜合以上，對於任意 group $$G$$，我們可以用一演算法來決定其結構：

1. Find the cardinality of $$G$$.
2. List all possible group structures by the [ fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups](#theorem--fundamental-theorem-of-finitely-generated-abelian-groups).
3. For each prime $$p\big\vert \vert G \vert$$, compute $$\vert G^{(p)} \vert, \vert G^{(p^2)} \vert,\cdots $$ to determine the $$p$$-torsion subgroup of $$G$$.

關於 cardinality，補一個 theorem：

#### Theorem (cardinality of $$\mathbb{Z}_m^{\times}$$)

> $$\vert \mathbb{Z}_m^{\times} \vert = m\prod_p(1-1/p) $$, where $$p$$ runs through all prime divisors of $$m$$.