---
layout: page
title: Ideals
usemathjax: true
tag: Abstract Algebra, Ring
time: 2023/03/18
---

**Table of Content**
- [Definition (ideal)](#definition-ideal)
  - [Proposition (kernel is an ideal)](#proposition-kernel-is-an-ideal)
- [Theorem (well-defined multi.)](#theorem-well-defined-multi)
  - [Corollary (additive coset; ring)](#corollary-additive-coset-ring)
  - [Examples](#examples)
- [Theorem (ideal as a kernel)](#theorem-ideal-as-a-kernel)
- [Theorem (ring isomorphism theorem)](#theorem-ring-isomorphism-theorem)
- [Theorem (kernel ideal tongue twister)](#theorem-kernel-ideal-tongue-twister)
  - [Remark](#remark)
- [Remark](#remark-1)

---

## Definition (ideal)
> An **additive subgroup** $$I$$ of a ring $$R$$ satisfiying $$aI\subset I, Ib\subset I$$ for all $$a,b\in R$$ is an **ideal** of $$R$$. Especially, $$I$$ is a **subring**.

> $$a$$ 和 $$b$$ 被 $$I$$ **吸收**了！

### Proposition (kernel is an ideal)
> The kernel of a ring homomorphism is an ideal.

**Proof**

By this [lemma](../quaternion-and-ring-homomorphism/#lemma-kernel-element).

## Theorem (well-defined multi.)
> Let $$H$$ be a subring of a ring $$R$$. The map 
>
> $$
> \times:(a+H, b+H)\mapsto (ab)+H
> $$
>
> is a **well-defined** multiplication of **additive cosets** of $$H$$ **iff** $$H$$ is an ideal.

**Proof**

(待補)

### Corollary (additive coset; ring)
> Let $$I$$ be an ideal of a ring $$R$$. The **additive cosets** of $$I$$ form a **ring** $$R/I$$, with addition and multiplication given by 
>
> $$
> \begin{align*}
>  +:(a+I, b+I)\mapsto(a+b)+I, \\
> \times:(a+I,b+I)\mapsto(ab)+I.  
> \end{align*}
> $$

> $$R/I$$ 讀做 **the quotient ring (or factor ring) of $$R$$ by $$I$$**.

### Examples

- Let $$R=\Bbb Z$$. Then $$n\Bbb Z$$ are ideals of $$\Bbb Z$$ for all $$n\in \Bbb Z$$. The factor rings are $$Z/n\Bbb Z$$.
  - 任何整數乘上 $$n$$ 就被 $$n\Bbb Z$$ 吸進去了。
- Let $$R=\Bbb R[x]$$. Then $$\{(x-1)g(x)\mid g(x)\in R \}$$ is an ideal of $$R$$.
  - 可以把 $$(x-1)$$ 替換成任意常數以外的多項式！
- Let $$R$$ be a **commutative** ring, and $$a$$ be an element of $$R$$. Then the set $$\{ra\mid r\in R \}$$ is an **ideal**, called the **principal ideal generated by $$a$$**, and is denoted by **$$\langle a\rangle$$ or $$Ra$$**.
- $$\Bbb Z$$ is a subring of $$\Bbb Q$$, but is **not** an ideal.

## Theorem (ideal as a kernel)
> Let $$I$$ be an ideal of a ring $$R$$. The map $$\gamma: R\to R/I$$ defined by $$\gamma: a\mapsto a+I$$ is a **ring homomorphism** with **kernel $$I$$**.

**Proof**

Use [this theorem](#corollary-additive-coset-ring). 

## Theorem (ring isomorphism theorem)
> Let $$\phi: R\to R'$$ be a ring homomorphism. Then we have $$R/\text{ker}\phi \cong \phi(R)$$.

**Proof**

Let $$I=\text{ker}\phi$$. Define $$\phi^*: R/I \to \phi(R)$$ by $$\phi^*(a+I) = \phi(a)$$. By [the first isomorphism theorem for groups](../3-isomorphism/#the-first-isomorphism-theorem), we have proved that $$\phi^*$$ is a **well-defined additive group isomorphism**. It remains to show that **$$\phi^*((a+I)(b+I)) = \phi^*(a+I)\phi^*(b+I)$$**. This follows from the definition of $$\phi^*$$. ◼

> 看看 [Three isomorphism theorems](../3-isomorphism)。

> 處理 ring 時，當 additive group 搞定後，再把乘法的結合、分配解決就好了！

## Theorem (kernel ideal tongue twister)
> Let $$\phi: R\to R'$$ be a ring homomorphism with kernel $$\text{ker}\phi$$. Then there is a **bijection** between **ideals of $$R$$ containing $$\text{ker}\phi$$** and **ideals of $$\phi(R)$$**. 

**Proof**

Let $$K=\text{ker}\phi$$. Suppose $$I$$ is an ideal of $$R$$ containing $$K$$. Then 

$$
I/K = \{K, r_1+K, \cdots, r_{m-1}+K \},
$$

for some $$r_i\in R$$. That is to say, in the set of all ideals containing $$K$$, each of them can be **distinguished by the cosets** $$r_i + K$$ of their own. Moreover, $$I/K$$ is also an additive subgroup of $$R/K$$, and even an **ideal of $$R/K$$**, for [the addition and multiplication defined above](#corollary-additive-coset-ring)!

Then, by [the ring isomorphism theorem](#theorem-ring-isomorphism-theorem), $$R/K \cong \phi(R)$$. Since the two rings are isomorphic, their ideals must have a bijective correspondence. Therefore the theorem is proved. ◼

> 發現 $$I/K$$ 是 $$R/K$$ 的 ideal 非常關鍵！

### Remark

在定理敘述中，如果 $$I$$ 不包含 kernel 的話，$$I/K$$ 就不存在了，因為 quotient 根本無法成立。

## Remark

對於 group 來說，任意 $$g\in G$$ 都能在 **normal** subgroup 左右移動；對於 ring 來說，任意 $$r\in R$$ 皆被 **ideal** 吸收。而且，group homomorphism 的 kernel 是 **normal** subgroup；ring homomorphism 的 kernel 正是 **ideal**！